let's talk a little bit about motivation
okay so
motivational styles okay so the first
thing to understand is that we think
about motivation as a monolith right so
people say i
lack motivation i don't have motivation
i wish i was motivated
so if we really tunnel down into that
language what it means is that
motivation is one quality
that has like a quantifiable number
right it just moves in one direction or
it's even binary
i have i have motivation or i don't have
motivation
and so people say like oh i lack
um and so in my experience like that's
not really how it works that motivation
is a lot like body type so
for example we know in western medicine
that there are different kinds of
metabolism right there are people who
have slow metabolisms
and they're people who have fast
metabolisms so people who have fast
metabo
metabolisms can kind of eat whatever
they want to and their body is just
going to burn it up
and then people with slow metabolisms
they can even eat healthy and they're
still going to be sort of heavyset
so we can call we call those people like
big boned is what people used to say
um and so the first thing to kind of
understand is that like
people are different okay and so
but in western medicine we don't really
think about that in the way that western
science conceptualizes things it
conceptualizes things
as standalone monolithic concepts so for
example like
gravity is gravity no matter where you
go the caloric
recommendations from the u.s government
are like 2 000 calories or the world
health organization
or 2 000 calories a day no matter who
you are or where you are
right um actually i mean there are
different caloric
recommendations for children and things
like that but generally speaking
when we think about western
recommendations or western solutions
they're a one-size-fits-all solution
and you kind of see this on the internet
because you'll get a bunch of people who
are like motivational speakers
and what they do is try to motivate
everyone right because they sort of say
that you're lacking motivation so you
just
need this motivation and then you'll be
fine and it's kind of like making a 2000
calorie recommendation for
people with slow metabolisms and people
with fast metabolisms which is kind of
silly because these people are
fundamentally
different the way their metabolisms work
is different and so the dietary
recommendations need to be
tailored to the metabolic fingerprint
of the person right so this person has a
relatively different kind of class
of metabolism they have a different
metabolic style
and therefore they need different kinds
of recommendations
for an ideal diet but that's not how
western medicine works western medicine
is sort of a one-size-fits-all
kind of approach right if i diagnose you
with depression
i treat depression so when i was
training to become a psychiatrist they
gave us a class about
a depression not about people so if you
go to the diagnostic and it sounds weird
but we treat an illness we don't treat a
person
i say okay if i diagnose you with
depression then i go to the depression
protocol and i give you this medication
and i do this and i do this
and so basically the way that western
medicine works is that we
average a bunch of stuff and that's what
we make is our recommendation
so if i were to say like okay you know
how did they come
up with the 2000 calorie diet what they
did is they asked a bunch of healthy
people how many calories do you eat a
day
and there was a range some people ate
1500 some people ate 2 500
and then they averaged all those numbers
and they say we recommend that
you eat 2 000 calories a day that's how
we come up with our answers
we average populations to make a uniform
recommendation
but if you stop and really think about
it within that population two thousand
calories isn't going to work for the
person who normally is eating 2500
calories
and isn't going to work for the person
who's eating 1500
and so that's kind of bizarre it's
almost like if i were to say okay like
if we relied on the fda to tell us what
kind of clothing to wear
what the fda would do is survey the us
population
and would say what size clothing do you
wear and some people would wear larges
some people wear small
some people were would wear extra larges
they'd average them all together and
they'd say everyone should
wear between a medium and a large that's
our recommendation
and so if you kind of think about it
that's just that's just dumb like you're
gonna miss the boat on a lot of people
but like most people would be kind of
okay with that right
if you give everyone a piece of clothing
between a medium and large
it's going to kind of work for a fair
number of people it's going to be like
kind of baggy but they're not going to
be walking around like
naked and for the people it's going to
be a little bit tight and uncomfortable
but they'll manage and so that's what
our recommendations are like
so 2000 calories a day sort of works for
most people
um but it's not really ideal for many
people at all
and so we think about motivation sort of
is the same way
and we kind of say like okay so this is
what works on average for a bunch of
people which is what motivational
speakers do right they'll say like
i've done this thing and about 50 of
people who show up to my motivational
seminars get help from it
and the whole reason that motivational
seminars
are still a thing is because they're
ineffective because like just think
about this for a second right
if they were actually effective then
you'd do like 10 seminars and then you'd
have motivated everyone and then you'd
be done and no one would need your help
there's a really simple like thing in
medicine whereas like you know when you
have an effective treatment for medicine
in medicine like the problem sort of
goes away and you don't need the
treatment anymore
a good example of this is like the
smallpox vaccine like we don't really
worry too much about smallpox thanks god
thank god because we sort of like took
care of it right
we sort of took care of like nutritional
problems like you know we sort of took
care of things like sinus infections
which used to be lethal like a thousand
years ago
and so when you actually have an
effective solution
the problem sort of goes away and so
then the question becomes like why are
these motivational seminars so
successful
if they don't really fix the problem and
that's because they do a good job for a
slice of the population
and that's where we get to the concept
of motivational styles
so in the west what we tend to think
about is that like there's a particular
kind of motivation that we shoot for
and i think what gets us into a lot of
trouble is it's not
that kind of motivation doesn't work for
everyone
and that's because we each have a
cognitive fingerprint or a particular
cognitive style
and what i've found is that once you
understand what your cognitive style is
once
once you understand what your
motivational style is
then you can actually motivate yourself
in sort of like a very specific way
and if we go back to the diet analogy
like people are figuring out on their
own
that even though the fda says you should
you know bread rice
or noodles makes no difference you
should eat x
number of carbs per day that some people
are gluten gluten insensitive
and so like even though the fda says oh
it makes no difference for some people
they're like it absolutely makes a
difference
that the fda will say a certain amount
of fat and a certain amount of protein
whereas some people will be like dairy
really messes me up or cheese really
messes me up
that there's individual variants within
a population that a global
recommendation doesn't capture
and so i think that's true of motivation
as well that where we make global
recommendations of
this is how you get motivated and you
should just do this
just do it man get good noob
right just do it and that only works for
a particular kind of motivational style
and so what we're gonna do is turn to
something called
ayurveda so ayurveda is a traditional
system of medicine from india from
about 5 000 years ago and the really
cool thing about ayurveda is people
in ayurveda sort of said they started
with the idea that people are like
fundamentally different they're like oh
look this person has a fast metabolism
and this person has a slow metabolism
this person feels really really like um
you know bad when they eat a bunch of
salad like they really don't like to eat
salad
and this person really likes salad oh
there's like different dietary
preferences
there are different metabolic styles
there are different
cognitive styles and so they came up
with these three things called doshas
and doshas
are essentially classifications that are
not real they're just ways that we kind
of lump people together
and what they realized is that the
dorsals like sort of
relate to the elements and what they
mean by that is not so much that like
you can
you know so there's like a wind type a
fire type and an earth type
and so it's not so much that you know
you can like
biopsy someone and you're gonna see wind
in one person but what they noticed is
that some
mines are kind of like the wind they're
highly dynamic so i'm avata type which
means i'm a wind type mind
which means that my mind is all over the
place so i'm kind of prone to adhd and
anxiety like my mind kind of thinks
about this and then i get excited about
that and then i get bored of this and
i kind of bounce around all over the
place
and then there's there's the second type
which is sort of the fire type mind
which is a bit the mind
and the bit the mind is sort of like
fire it's like slow and steady kind of
burns
i mean not really slow but it kind of
burns consistently in one direction
so if you're trying to figure out you
know which way the wind is blowing the
wind will blow this way today and it'll
blow that way tomorrow
which is the whole reason you have a
weather vane right that little thing
that spins around because the wind
changes direction
whereas if i you know if i go to like a
field and i like
light a fire in the corner of the field
like the fire is gonna spread in a
pretty consistent
and steady manner and this is the kind
of motivation that we tend to prefer
or prioritize in the west we tend to
think about
motivation as fit the style motivation
like you wake up every day
you hammer out your work you go to bed
you wake up the next day you're
ambitious
you're driven you're kind of fiery like
you you guys like
you know people envy and we value sort
of this western style
or the fire type motivation of i want to
wake up every day and have a fire in my
belly like i want to work hard and i
want to be ambitious
and uh you know that's the kind of thing
that we kind of
try to value and then the third
motivational style is the kapha style or
the earth style
so people with with a kapha motivational
pattern or sort of like
slow steady resilient if you think about
the earth right like earth is sort of
like stable
it's steady it's strong but it's not
very flashy it doesn't move too much
and so there's a kapha style of
motivation which is kind of like slow
and steady wins the race
like um and so these are kind of the
three different motivational styles
okay so i think part of the reason that
i want to explain this to you guys is
that if you try to adopt a motivational
strategy that does not meet your
cognitive style you're gonna run into
trouble
because it's not what you're built for
so just to use a gaming analogy it's
like you know if i watch a youtube video
of like you know mitch has been
streaming wow recently so if i watch
mitch
and i'm like oh man like mages are op
dude like mages are sick bro
and and then like i try to be a mage but
my character is like a fighter i'm gonna
suck
right so there are different classes and
just because a particular class gets a
bunch of hype
doesn't mean it's the class that you're
playing and so the most important thing
is that you need to gear
and build your strategy based on the
class and the stats that you have
as opposed to like the stats that get
advertised
in the class that gets advertised right
and so we're gonna kind of go through
the three different styles i'm gonna
tell you a little bit about them
and i'm gonna tell you a little bit
about how to find your ideal form of
motivation
okay all right so what i'm going to call
them
is there's a vata motivation which is a
dynamic motivation
a bit the motivation which is a driven
motivation
and a resilient motivation which is a
kapha motivation
okay and the first thing that i want to
point out is that isn't driven in
motivation the same thing like isn't
that redundant like that's my whole
point
is that we define motivation in the bit
the style and that's what holds people
back is because we assume that all
motivation
has to be like this drive oriented like
steady burn kind of ambition sort of
motivation
and if you really want to be successful
you don't need to adopt that style if
that's not what works for you okay
so let's start with the dynamic form of
motivation or the vata or wind kind of
motivation okay i'm going to use those
three terms kind of interchangeably
so vatas tend to be like very dynamic so
they tend to like their mind is sort of
like the wind they move in this
direction they kind of move in that
direction they move in a different
direction
and so their motivation is something
that is easy come
easy go and so the first thing that i
want you guys to notice is that for
people a lot of people
complain about this they say that my
motivation i get super excited about
something
and then i lack follow through and they
say that this is a problem to be fixed
and then they beat their heads against a
wall trying to
stop having their attention wander so
much and then start to like really focus
on follow through and they want to be
more bit the like right they want to be
like more driven
and and what i would say to these people
is actually you shouldn't do that
because that's not who you are and when
i tried to do that i started to suck at
life
and actually what vata motivators need
to do is just acknowledge that you're
going to get excited about stuff
and then you're going to get bored of
stuff and so the solution for people who
have
avata motivational style is to rotate
what you're working on and so what i do
like my days like i'm
part clinician i stream three days a
week i see patients
like a couple days a week i you know
have meetings for healthy
gamer i do research i do some consulting
here and there
um and so like if my my schedule is like
all over the place like today you know i
saw a patient in the morning
i wrote this lecture now i'm streaming i
have a research meeting after this
i'm going to play some cyberpunk after
that i've got a random patient like this
evening
and so my mind i can work 10 hours a day
every single day as long as i'm giving
my
mind different kinds of things to work
on and this was a huge discovery for me
because what i used to do is like i used
to look at my colleagues who were
successful
and what i would see is people who were
like super hyper focused on
one thing like i have a colleague who's
a awesome person
so she's like an md phd and does a lot
of schizophrenia brain research
and she knows the brains of people with
schizophrenia
in and out and she like does research
and works clinically in schizophrenia
that's like what she does like day in
and day out and if
i would look at her i'd say wow look at
how hyper successful she is she's like
assistant professor at the harvard
medical school and she has this like
she goes to international conferences
and presents her research wow she's so
amazing i wish i could devote myself to
something the way that she does
and then i realized like that's just not
who i am right so her
her style is very kapha oriented we'll
kind of get to that
so for vata styles recognize that your
mind is dynamic
that your motivation is easy come easy
go that follow through is going to be
hard for you which is totally fine
because what isn't hard for you is
getting re-excited about something right
so what you want to do is your
your excitement is going to bump up and
then it's going to fade
but what you can count on yourself for
is you're going to get excited about it
again
so what you need to do is have a
rotation
of what you work on so instead of going
from like okay today i'm going to learn
guitar and tomorrow i'm going to
learn drums and then the third day i'm
going to learn piano
pick like one instrument pick like one
life skill
and then like try to write and then work
on your resume and then do this
and then the key thing about vatas is
that instead of going from
one to two to three to four five six
seven eight nine ten eleven twelve
thirteen fourteen what you'll actually
find is once you hit number three or
four
you can go back to number one and you'll
be just excited about it
just as excited so you at the end of the
day what you're gonna do is not dig
one well a hundred feet deep you're
gonna dig one well one foot deep and
then you're gonna start a second well
and a third well and a fourth well
and then you just need to rotate back to
number one and then over the course
of like a month you'll have you'll have
dug four 50-foot wells
which is like pretty good and kind of
good enough okay
so solution to vata motivation is don't
try to force yourself
to follow through let your mind wander
and come back to it
from a daily perspective what you want
to do is take frequent breaks and do
multiple things a day
okay so like for vatas your
your day shouldn't be like okay i'm
gonna start work
every day at like you know 10 a.m and
i'm gonna work until
six no i mean your day can be kind of
all over the place like for structure
and frequent breaks
you know you can start you want to try
to be consistent but it's okay to have
some variability in your start time
structure frequent breaks because your
mind is going to do way better
when it's kind of like fresh and so the
other way to think about vata motivation
is that y'all are sprinters
not marathon runners so you want to have
your day lined up in like multiple
sprints
or even like a sprint for a week where
like this week i'm gonna sit down and
i'm gonna learn how to program python
and then next week i'm gonna sit down
and i'm gonna like learn how to play the
piano
so you want to organize your day in in
in sprints okay
or organize your kind of motivational
style in sprints
next thing is pitfalls for vata people
so the pitfalls that vata people run
into
tend to be like anxiety-oriented or
worry-oriented
so since our mind is kind of all over
the place
we tend to um you know anticipate all
kinds of different sorts of problems
and then all of those problems will kind
of destroy our motivation
because we're like this could go wrong
and that could go wrong and that could
go wrong and that could go wrong
and so the best thing to kind of do
there's some meditation techniques and
things like that we
that we've taught so nadi should be is
like a really good technique
for um vata motivators
kapalabhati is also really good you kind
of want to slow yourself down a little
bit just recognize that you may worry
about things
and recognize that your mind has the
capacity to see
more problems than actually exist
so have a little bit of faith in
yourself and kind of circle back to it
and over time your let your excitement
overcome your anxiety because remember
when you get started you're not anxious
you're just excited about it
and so as your excitement dwindles the
anxiety will start to decrease
and you'll lose motivation because of
your anxiety and that's actually totally
fine
so just move to the next thing and then
over time the excitement will rebuild
and the anxiety will just kind of go
away
because the thing that you've got
working for you if you're avata mind
is that the anxiety is going to be a
sprint in your mind too
that the anxiety will flare and as long
as you don't feed it
it'll actually die away on its own
because your mind is going to get bored
of it and it's going to be like oh like
let's go do something else now
so you can play that to your that's a
strength that you can kind of rely on
okay so so def the second type is the
pitta
or the driven motivational style or the
the fire motivation
so this is what i would call kind of a
more traditional motivation so when we
think about people who are highly
motivated
we think about pittas okay so bit the
motivation is like the steady burn
it's like it's not slow but it's kind of
steady
constant kind of driven towards a
particular thing and if you're a pit the
motivator generally speaking
you may not actually have that much
trouble with motivation because our
society is designed
for fitness to succeed so our societal
structure is like if you look at
you know pay raises for example there's
like a statistic that suggests that
people who earn the highest salaries
like move every two years
so you're not like avatar and switching
jobs every six months
and you're not like a kapha and
switching jobs every five years if you
like kind of
go to a job you work really hard you
start to kind of get bored of it you
sort of burn out a little bit and then
you move to the next thing that's sort
of the bit the style
so if you're a pit the motivator a
couple of things to
kind of be mindful of is that you want a
sort of stable work day so you want to
work
start at maybe like you know somewhere
between eight and ten in the morning
and then run until five or six um you
neces you don't necessarily want to take
a bunch of breaks because like once you
get going you kind of get going right
um and then like you know if the fire
goes out it can be hard to kind of
reignite it
second thing about bit this is you have
to be careful about burnout so
bitters often times have ambition
that exceeds their stamina okay so what
this means is
and you go you guys may run into this
which is that
um you know you feel like you really
want to work
but then you kind of feel burnt out at
the end and then like
you don't actually end up progressing
because you kind of like
burnt up too quickly and so what i want
you guys to think a little bit about is
like
you know the brightest candle burns out
the fastest
so if you're a pit that you may need to
restrain that kind of fire
a little bit you guys have to be careful
about sort of feelings of ambition or
feelings of righteousness
or other kinds of like emotions like
anger or irritability
that drive you to work really hard and
kind of leave you
in sort of a burnt out sort of state so
pithas also need to watch out for
interpersonal conflict
so my diagnostic question for pithas is
are you intolerant of the idiocy of
others
and if the answer to that question is
yes then chances are you're a pitta
so as you motivate yourself you guys may
end up working with other people
and you may find that their motivational
style
is different from yours and you can get
really really frustrated with them and
that can lead to interpersonal conflict
which really shatters your productivity
because then you're fighting with this
person instead of doing your work
so the pitfall to really watch out for
if you're a beta is interpersonal
conflict
that brings us to our third um
motivational style which is kaphas
so kaphas are earth types or
the resilient motivators i kind of think
about them
their motivation is like a marathon okay
so what that means is that it's slow to
start
and really doesn't like start rolling
until like you know
late in the day so i want you guys to
think about kapha's as people with
low acceleration and high top speed
whereas vatas have high acceleration and
low top speed
betas are kind of in the middle so the
biggest thing about kaphas is that they
tend to beat themselves up
for not being faster they look at the
fitness and they say like oh my god look
at how successful and driven this person
is
they look at the vatas and they're like
oh my god look at how quickly this
person learns things
so uh gaffas just they start slow but
they hit their top speed
and when they hit their top speed they
do awesome work so the main thing about
guppas is you got to give yourself
time to get started so some of these
people may have a lot of trouble
starting work like early in the morning
and they may sort of like have their
most productive hours late at night
or like in the in the middle of the
afternoon whereas like a zavata
once 3 pm rolls around i like i'm done
like my stamina is shot
and so for kapha kapha's the biggest
thing that they need to learn is kind of
patience
right and recognize that like you're
someone who will take
maybe a few weeks or a few months to
like figure out how
you know your job works some people are
quick studies
kaphas are slow studies which doesn't
mean that they're dumb
because the interesting thing about
kapha memory is that they learn
slowly but they also forget slowly
whereas vatas learn very quickly and
then they forget very quickly
so with kapha's you're sort of like a
late game build
okay so it's going to take you some time
to get started so be patient with
yourself
once you get kraken you're a force to be
reckoned with
so you can think about kaf as sort of
late bloomers i think a lot of people
on you know a lot of people in our
community are like oh i miss the boat
i'm so old now
um there are so many people who are
younger and more successful than i am
you got to understand that you just may
be a late bloomer
and be patient with yourself which
brings us to the cognitive pitfall
of guffas which is that they tend to be
very very self-critical and prone to
depression
and as a result they are likely to give
up
kind of at the worst possible moment
just when they're about to really start
kicking ass
right so i want you guys to think about
a kapha like a late game carry
whereas like if you're 25 minutes into
the game and you haven't really done a
whole lot you've just been kind of
farming and you've died a couple of
times
but you're sort of a late game carry and
and guffas have a tendency to be really
self-critical
and so they'll work at something for
like you know a week two weeks three
weeks four weeks and they won't see a
whole lot of result
and then the self-critical thinking
starts to step in and says oh look at
how dumb you
are you've been doing this for a month
and you haven't gotten anywhere you
might as well stop
and then when they stop they really
shoot themselves in the foot because if
they
actually just like recognize that it's
going to take me a while
and if you recognize that you're patient
with yourself if you let yourself be
patient with yourself
if you don't let yourself be quite so
critical about how slow you are
you'll realize that like when you figure
things out you'll have figured them out
completely and then you'll really start
to fly
so just give yourself a little bit of
time give yourself a little bit of
patience and recognize that
your acceleration is going to be slow
but once you get into a groove
you'll really do amazing work so i've
worked with a couple of like guffas
who um you know
they they sort of feel very anxious in
their workplace because they'll get some
new employee
who like seems super bright and super
capable and everyone's like oh look how
smart this person is
and then like they'll get a new person
you know they've been there for three
years and then the new person shows up
nakafa feels like this person is doing
way better than i am
and they've only been here two weeks and
i've been here three three years
and then if they give themselves a
little bit of patience what they begin
to see is that like
everyone starts to realize oh the shiny
new toy is just shiny and actually can't
get the work done
and they kind of come back to the coffin
they're like hey can you help us out
with this again
hey you know it seems like i'm really
having trouble this person's really not
cutting it
and so kapha's kind of you know you just
got to really give yourself patience
um and so that's sort of a quick rundown
of different motivational styles just to
recap
we have vata motivators which are
sprinters or dynamic
right motivation is easy come easy go
the solution is to rotate things that
you work on
and let your mind be a little bit free
but
rotate them between the same set of
things so when you get bored of number
one go to number two when you get bored
of number two go to number three you get
bored of number three
number four and then back to one the
things to watch out about are anxiety
so a lot of times your anxiety will tell
you oh my god all this stuff will go
wrong just drop it
and the cool thing to remember there is
that like your anxiety will go away too
because your mind is fata and dynamic
and you'll get bored of your anxiety
second type is bit the motivators that
are sort of driven
motivators so this is the classic
motivation that's kind of kind of steady
constant
a lot of ambition which you have to
watch out for is interpersonal conflict
because
you're going to have low tolerance and
low patience for other people
there's going to be a lot of anger
irritability righteousness
that could kind of push you in the wrong
direction and then you're going to get
so caught up in your interpersonal
conflict that you're not going to be
productive in your work anymore
the third motivational type is the
kaphas or earth motivators or resilient
motivators
these are our marathon runners
so they start slow um they take a while
to get to top speed but once they hit
top speed they're really a force to be
reckoned with
so you got to give yourself time and
have patience to for yourself
and recognize that kaphas have a
tendency to be very self-critical
and so a lot of kaphas give up right at
the moment of success
and so just give yourself more time give
yourself time to kind of get started
and you'll be far more successful
so i hope that was kind of um
helpful and what i want to really what i
want you guys to take away is that if
you have
trouble with motivation maybe the reason
you struggle so much is because you're
trying to motivate
you're trying to play a class that
you're not that you aren't
right so you're a mage running around
with a two-handed sword and you're like
my dps sucks
yeah it's going to like start casting
fireballs bro
and don't do what other people are doing
recognize what your strengths are
and play to your motivational strengths
and then you'll be surprised at what
you're able to accomplish
you